Blog post on Quarkus Agentic AI (#2237)
quarkusio/quarkusio.github.io: _posts/2025-02-18-agentic-ai-with-quarkus.adoc

.Routing pattern
image::routing-pattern.png[]

In this way when the user calls the https://github.com/mariofusco/quarkus-agentic-ai/blob/main/src/main/java/org/agenticai/routing/ExpertAssistanceResource.java[rest endpoint] exposing this service writing something like: "I broke my leg what should I do",

http://localhost:8080/expert/request/I%20broke%20my%20leg%20what%20should%20I%20do

the first LLM categorizes this request as a medical one and the router forward it to the medical expert LLM, thus generating a result like https://github.com/mariofusco/quarkus-agentic-ai/blob/main/text/expert-response.txt[this].

== Agents

Agents differ from the workflow patterns discussed so far because the control flow is entirely delegated to LLMs, that typically invoke tools to complete determinate subtask, instead of being implemented programmatically. These tools can be seen as stateless functions, opportunistically invoked by the LLM to achieve its goal and implemented in a variety of different technologies, like simple imperative methods, external web services or even other LLMs.

> 

Author: In my opinion the tracings were only interesting to demonstrate the sequential vs. parallel workflows, is there anything else that could be relevant to demonstrate with the tracings of the execution of these agents?

> 

Reviewer: MY comment was actually more about the routing approach with 2 traces:

- prompt -> router -> medical
- prompt -> router -> technical

No precipitation expected, and the wind speed will be up to 5.6 km/h.
The overall weather condition is expected to be cloudy.
----

In essence this control flow is quite similar to what described in the prompt chaining workflow, where the user input is sequentially transformed in steps (in this case going from the prompt, to the name of the city contained in that prompt, to the geographical coordinates of that city, to the weather forecasts at those coordinates), but as anticipated this time the major difference is in the fact that the sequence of steps is directly scheduled by the LLM instead of being externally orchestrated in a programmatic way.

=== A more general purpose AI agent

Using a bigger model (https://github.com/mariofusco/quarkus-agentic-ai/blob/main/src/main/java/org/agenticai/searchastool[this example] has been configured with `qwen2.5-14b` and a longer timeout to give it a chance to complete its task)

[source, properties]
----
quarkus.langchain4j.ollama.big-model.chat-model.model-id=qwen2.5:14b
quarkus.langchain4j.ollama.big-model.chat-model.temperature=0
quarkus.langchain4j.ollama.big-model.timeout=600s
----

> it is possible to dare to implement an AI agent with more freedom to operate, in order to make it capable to cover a larger range of tasks. This https://github.com/mariofusco/quarkus-agentic-ai/blob/main/src/main/java/org/agenticai/searchastool/IntelligentAgent.java[intelligent agent] has been provided with only https://github.com/mariofusco/quarkus-agentic-ai/blob/main/src/main/java/org/agenticai/searchastool/WebSearchService.java[one tool] that can perform a web search on DuckDuckGo and return the result in plain text. What the AI agent does is using this tool to retrieve online information for things that it ignores and put them together in order to provide an answer for a generic user question.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implementing an AI agent with more freedom to operate is possible. Thus, agents can cover a more extensive range of tasks. This https://github.com/mariofusco/quarkus-agentic-ai/blob/main/src/main/java/org/agenticai/searchastool/IntelligentAgent.java[intelligent agent] has been provided with only https://github.com/mariofusco/quarkus-agentic-ai/blob/main/src/main/java/org/agenticai/searchastool/WebSearchService.java[one tool] that can perform a web search on _DuckDuckGo_ and returns the result in plain text. The AI agent uses this tool to retrieve online information for everything it ignores and arrange that data together to provide an answer to a generic user question.

These more capable agents require two main ingredients:

1. A model able to reason and decide which tools to call with which parameter
2. A set of tools (toolbox in the Quarkus lingo) giving the LLM more data and capabilities
```

> For instance we may want to ask `how many seconds would it take for a leopard at full speed to run through Pont des Arts` making a request to the https://github.com/mariofusco/quarkus-agentic-ai/blob/main/src/main/java/org/agenticai/searchastool/AgenticChatbotResource.java[rest endpoint] exposing this service like it follows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, consider the following question: How many seconds would it take for a leopard at full speed to run through the Pont des Arts? Using this https://github.com/mariofusco/quarkus-agentic-ai/blob/main/src/main/java/org/agenticai/searchastool/AgenticChatbotResource.java[HTTP endpoint], it would be executed using:
```

> http://localhost:8080/ask/how%20many%20seconds%20would%20it%20take%20for%20a%20leopard%20at%20full%20speed%20to%20run%20through%20Pont%20des%20Arts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
> curl http://localhost:8080/ask/how%20many%20seconds%20would%20it%20take%20for%20a%20leopard%20at%20full%20speed%20to%20run%20through%20Pont%20des%20Arts
```
```

> To reply to this question the intelligent agent invokes the web search tool twice, once to find the length of Pont des Arts and once to retrieve the speed of a leopard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To reply to this question,, the agent invokes the web search tool twice: once to find the length of Pont des Arts and once to retrieve a leopard's speed.
```

BTW, which Pont des Arts are you talking about?

.An agent using an external web search tool
image::ai-agent.png[]

> and then puts this information together generating an output like the following.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, the agent puts this information together and  generates an output like:
```

----
The length of Pont des Arts is approximately 155 meters. A leopard can run at speeds up to about 58 kilometers per hour (36 miles per hour). To calculate how many seconds it would take for a leopard running at full speed to cross the bridge, we need to convert its speed into meters per second and then divide the length of the bridge by this speed.

1 kilometer = 1000 meters
58 kilometers/hour = 58 * 1000 / 3600 ≈ 16.11 meters/second

Now, we can calculate the time it would take for a leopard to run through Pont des Arts:

Time (seconds) = Distance (meters) / Speed (m/s)
= 155 / 16.11
≈ 9.62 seconds

So, it would take approximately 9.62 seconds for a leopard running at full speed to run through Pont des Arts.
----

=== Agents and Conversational AI

> The flexibility of AI agents can become even more relevant when used in services not intended to fulfil a single request, but needing to have a longer conversation with the user in order to achieve their goal. For instance agents can function as chatbots, enabling them to handle multiple users in parallel, each with their own independent conversation. This requires managing the state of each conversation, often referred to as memories (the set of messages already exchanged with the LLM).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The flexibility of AI agents can become even more relevant when used in services that are not intended to fulfill a single request but need to have a longer conversation with the user to achieve their goal. For instance, agents can function as chatbots, enabling them to handle multiple users in parallel, each with their own independent conversation. This requires managing the state of each conversation, often referred to as memories (the set of messages already exchanged with the LLM).
```

> A https://github.com/mariofusco/quarkus-agentic-ai/blob/main/src/main/java/org/agenticai/restaurant/RestaurantAgent.java[chatbot of a restaurant booking system], designed to chat with customers and collect their data and requirements, represents an interesting practical application of this pattern. When the agent completes that information gathering process, the chatbot uses a https://github.com/mariofusco/quarkus-agentic-ai/blob/main/src/main/java/org/agenticai/restaurant/booking/BookingService.java[tool accessing the database] of existing reservations to both check if there is still a table available for the customers needs and to place a booking of that table if so. To assist the customer in deciding whether it is appropriate to eat outside or not, the agent can also reuse, as a second tool, the https://github.com/mariofusco/quarkus-agentic-ai/blob/main/src/main/java/org/agenticai/restaurant/weather/WeatherService.java[weather forecast service] implemented in one of the former examples, passing to it the geographic coordinates of the restaurant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A https://github.com/mariofusco/quarkus-agentic-ai/blob/main/src/main/java/org/agenticai/restaurant/RestaurantAgent.java[chatbot of a restaurant booking system], designed to chat with customers and collect their data and requirements, represents an interesting practical application of this pattern. When the agent completes that information-gathering process, the chatbot uses a https://github.com/mariofusco/quarkus-agentic-ai/blob/main/src/main/java/org/agenticai/restaurant/booking/BookingService.java[tool accessing the database] of existing reservations to both check if there is still a table available for the customers needs and to place a booking of that table if so. To assist the customer in deciding whether it is appropriate to eat outside or not, the agent can also reuse, as a second tool, the https://github.com/mariofusco/quarkus-agentic-ai/blob/main/src/main/java/org/agenticai/restaurant/weather/WeatherService.java[weather forecast service] implemented in one of the former examples, passing to it the geographic coordinates of the restaurant.
```

[source, properties]
----
restaurant.location.latitude=45
restaurant.location.longitude=5
----

The final architectural design of the chatbot could be visualized in this way.

.The restaurant chatbot agent
image::restaurant-agent.png[]

> Once the customer provides all necessary details, the chatbot confirms the booking and presents a summary of the reservation. and the final booking is then stored in the database. It is possible to give a try to this chatbot accessing the URL:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the customer provides all necessary details, the chatbot confirms the booking and presents a reservation summary. The final booking is then stored in the database. It is possible to give this a try by accessing the URL:
```

http://localhost:8080/restaurant.html

> and a typical example of user interaction could be something like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A typical example of user interaction could be something like this:
```

.An example of interaction with the restaurant chatbot agent

> image::restaurant.png[]

Reviewer: We would need a conclusion pointing to the next steps:

- memory management across LLM calls 
- improving observability 
- dynamic tools (and tools registry)
- agentic pattern and MCP
